Okay, we've got the tapes going. Mr. Wolfe, usually what we do with an author is
just ask them a little bit about background and then get into their work. But I
think with you I'm going to do it the reverse, if you don't mind. The Book of
the New Sun is such an interesting work that I wanted to start with that. And I
know this question is going to be an awfully big one. Was there any particular
impetus or origin behind that series? Well, a number of things. That go
together. Things come together to create a book or to create the idea in the
loose sense for a book. In this case, I'm not sure that I can name anything
terribly dramatic. One of the things that happened was that I was at a science
fiction convention. And I attended a panel on costuming for the science fiction
masquerade. And as I listened to the various expert costumers talk about how
they did it and so forth, it occurred to me that nobody had ever done one of my
characters as far as I knew. And of course, I started to talk about that. And
then I thought of what the characters looked like. And it occurred to me that
one reason that no one had done it was that I did not have very many characters
who wore dramatic and interesting clothes. And so while I was sitting there in
the panel, I kind of designed Severian's outfit for him. And with very few
changes, it went into the book in that form. The cloak, trousers,
boots, bare chest, the mask, and so forth. And a part of it was just the idea
sparked by the panel. They're trying to achieve a dramatic visual effect.
Okay. At the end of Volume 1, you have a little end piece, signed GW, which I
assume is Gene Wolfe. And you present yourself as the translator. Yes. And I
wondered how that's possible. The narrative presumably happened in the future.
So how would Gene Wolfe have gotten hold of a manuscript to translate? Well, I
am dealing with that a little bit in the coda that I'm trying to do now to the
Book of the New Sun, the Earth of the New Sun, which I hope to have out in
perhaps two or three years. But if you have read the books, you realize, I hope,
that you're dealing with a society, a world, a universe, however you want to put
it, in which time travel is possible. And if time travel is possible, then it's
possible for me to get my hands now on the manuscript that Severian wrote a
million years in the future, or whatever number you care to use. Okay, good. Why
would you pick a torturer as the protagonist of a series like that? Well, what I
wanted to do was to take someone who was not obviously a hero. We have done an
awful lot of writing about people who are clearly heroes in the popular mind.
Private detectives, fighter pilots, and whatnot. I wanted to take someone who
was a villain in the popular mind and use him as my hero, as my central
character. And obviously, a torturer, an executioner, which Severian is as well
as a torturer at various parts of the book, is such a character. And he was the
And he was the one that I pass on to him.
But in many respects, I responded to Severian as a good man, in one sense he's a healer in fact, a very sensitive person.
Ah, well, I think that's precisely true.
If he had been a thoroughgoing villain, then there would have been no real purpose, as far as I'm concerned, in dealing with him in the book.
What I wanted to show is that a person could find himself in some such situation
and yet be fundamentally a decent man.
Okay, the claw itself, the jewel, the gem that Severian has, from what I
understood, that has no inherent power. It's only an exercise of Severian's
power, which comes from beyond the stars. Is that right? Basically, yes, that's
right. Again, this is something that we will be, or I will be dealing with, we,
Severian and I, we'll be dealing with, in more detail, in the fifth book. But
essentially, you're right. The claw is a magic gem in the popular imagination,
but only in the popular imagination. It's actually a reliquary.
Okay, why, I'm not sure this is going to be a very graceful question, but why do
you have such an intimate connection with the dead people in that book? It's a
very important part of it. Perhaps you could tell me a little bit more about
what you mean by the question, because I'm not sure I understand. Yeah, okay, I
guess sometimes we're in Severian's mind, and he talks about the fact that
everything we are, everything we have, comes from the dead, from people who are
no longer here. I think you have some other characters also say that. Yes. And,
of course, I guess the claw bringing some people back to life, and the way these
people are buried in that lake and so forth. It just seemed to me that you put a
lot of emphasis on people who are dead. Well, I think that that is appropriate
to the kind of society that I have imagined. Very old societies tend to be that
way. Ancient Egypt, I suppose, is the easiest example that comes to mind. When
people are surrounded by the evidences of the past and the very distant past, as
we are not in the United States, their minds tend to dwell on that, on the fact
that the board on which they move is a board which has been built by generations
which passed away long, long ago. I think that this is why the Chinese went into
ancestor worship, as they did for many, many hundreds of years. For example,
China is a very old country, and the Chinese people have been essentially in
that one spot for the length of their civilization. Our own civilization, I
think, is basically Sumerian, but it has moved around the Mediterranean and then
into southern Europe and then into northern Europe and then essentially across
the Atlantic here so that we don't have that feeling. But if our descendants are
still here, let's say, 10,000 years from now, they will very much have that
feeling about us, or at least I expect that they will have that feeling about
us.
Okay, I think each volume in that series has at least one so-called tale within
a tale, and I know that's a literary device. And I wonder why you use it so
frequently. Well, in the first place, because I like it myself, and I tend to
think that what I
like other readers will like. There are also mechanical reasons. The tale within
a tale can be used as a spacer, as a break between high climactic scenes, and it
can be very useful in that way. It can also sort of divide the book, separate
the first half from the second half when it seems desirable to do that. And I
did that in the Claw of the Conciliator, for example, in which the tale of the
student and his son comes right at the center of the book. And it's also in
Sword of the Lictor, where the tale of the boy called Frog is in the middle of
the book and essentially is splitting the halves. And you can also use it to
reveal character sometimes, as I did, for example, in the fourth book, where I
had the various people in the hospital each tell a story. This is a very, very
old literary technique. It goes back to the Middle Ages, at least, perhaps
beyond that, for all I know. You can use it to foreshadow things. You can also
use it to show parts of the society that would not otherwise be seen, as I tried
to give a glimpse of Foila's life on the pampas in the story in the fourth book,
The Citadel of the Autarch.
Okay, every once in a while with one of those tales, particularly those two you
just mentioned, the tale of a student and his son and the tale of a boy called
Frog, I thought I was catching some echoes or some reflections, say, from Greek
myth, or the one about the boy called Frog, there was a reference to Squanto and
planting of the fish and so forth. I suppose that was deliberate. Oh, certainly.
The basic story in the tale of a boy called Frog is the Mowgli stories by
Richard Kipling. Mowgli is Frog in Hindustani. What I was trying to show a
little bit was that stories that we think of as distinct may very well tend to
blend in the future, so that things that we think separate become attached to
one another. A story becomes part of a larger story, or even though I wasn't
showing this, a part of a story cycle. And I was interested, in other words, in
the evolution of those stories. In the case of the tale of a boy called Frog,
there is a Greek myth in there. Let's see. Early summer is the goddess Juno.
Spring wind is the goddess Mars, after whom, or pardon me, is the god Mars,
after whom March was named, and so forth. Okay, very good. I thought I saw a few
analogs, maybe, or models behind Baldanders, too, and I wondered if you had
anything behind him that you were modeling him on. Oh, yeah. Half a dozen
things. There's a little piece of Frankenstein, or I should say a little piece
of Frankenstein, and a little piece of Frankenstein's monster in there. That is
certainly sure, true. You'll find, I think, a little bit of borrowing from Moby
Dick in the character of Baldanders. I borrowed the name from the Book of
Imaginary Beings by George Louis Bores, who describes a monster called
Baldanders, who was a shape-changer, as the Tritons and Proteus and so forth
were supposed to be. And I thought it was a good name for a character who
continued to grow indefinitely, which is what Baldanders does. He also reminded
me of, I'm a teacher of the Middle Ages, medievalist, that's my field. And I
caught some echoes there of a giant fighting a knight when he fights Severian,
because he uses a club which he tries to smash him with, and I wonder if that
was part of it, too. Oh, yes, absolutely. Absolutely. This was the image
that I wanted, the Jack and the Giant killer image, with the castle and the
tower and so forth. Okay, good. I'm also a reader of Jack Vance, and I think I
caught an echo of him when you talk about the Diodans and even the idea of the
dying earth. Oh, yes, absolutely. Absolutely. I owe a great deal to Jack Vance,
and I'm not about to deny it. I love the dying earth. I read it, I don't know
how many times, probably four or five times, sincerely. And, yeah, it's, in many
ways, it's the same type of story.
Good. Okay, now this next one you may not want to answer until you finish the
earth with the new sun, but those who walk the corridors, those from the other
universe, the time travelers and so forth, are they guiding man to the new sun,
to a new age? Yeah. Well, you know, they are guiding man toward the new sun,
yes. And more than that, they are trying to shape humanity into something that
will be ethically acceptable.
Okay, and on this earth, they do their work through the Autarch. They choose him
and make him their agent, right? He is certainly one of their agents, yes. They
also act for themselves, and they also may manipulate other characters. Their
characters are certainly not limited to the Autarch. But since the Autarch is
the ruler of the country, he's obviously a fulcrum for power, and they use him
in that way. Of course, the fact that they do have time travel makes it possible
for them to prophesy, if you want to put it that way, and pass along to him
information that will be of great value, and obtain a good deal of cooperation
from him. The Autarch is in a very precarious situation, because he is ruling
over a rebellious nobility, the Exultant. And the Autarch himself is not a
member of that class, and is not acceptable to that class, which is why Vodalus
is in revolt against him. And in that situation, and with a foreign war going on
against the Acheans, he needs every bit of help that he can get.
Okay. I don't have a very logical mind, and time travel stories confuse the
Dickens out of me. I got the impression at the end that perhaps Severian, it's
almost a closed-circle kind of time travel thing, where Severian may be coming
back. Well, it is Severian's impression that there is a, that he himself is the
second cycle. In other words, that he was, has already gone through the business
of winning the Autarchy, and been sent back. And that's what he expresses, I
think, at the end of the fourth book.
Okay, would, just a couple more big ones on this, and I'll be done with it. This
may be too big for you even to want to answer, but is the Book of the New Sun a
religious work? Well, it is in part a religious work. It certainly isn't only a
religious work. What I tried to do in the book was touch upon the things that I
thought were important to mankind. One of the important things is saving the
Earth, which is something that we have only, only in this century have we
realized that it needed saving, but we now realize that it does. And in the
Earth of the New Sun, it's very apparent that it does. If something isn't done,
something positive, not just the kind of thing that we have, where perhaps we
could save it if we would refrain from poisoning the sea and killing the whales.
But if something positive isn't done, the planet is going to freeze. Another
important element in human life is religion. And so I tried to touch on that. I
also tried to touch on the family, on raising children and whatnot at various
places in the book. How long did it take you to write all four? Let's see. I
began in the summer of 1975 and turned in the last book in the summer of 1981, I
believe. So I'd be five years of my son. Miss Connie. And I understand that you
had the all four written before you had any published. Is that right? Depends on
what you mean by written. What I did was to write all four in first draft and
then go back and do all four in second draft. And then I did the final drafts,
which I think were about two more drafts, on the first book on Shadow of the
Torture, and then sent that out to market. Are you satisfied or pleased with the
series? Oh, yes. Yes. I think it's probably the best thing I've done, and it's
certainly the biggest thing I've done. The reason I ask that is I wonder what
you do for an encore after you've written a series like that.
Well, I'm not sure that I'm going to be called upon for an encore. I am trying
to do the coda, and I have another novel in the works, a completely unrelated
novel. I'm not sure that... I'm sure that there will be people who will say that
the Book of the New Sun is the best thing I've ever done. There are people who say
that Peace is the best thing I've ever done, and there are people who say that
The Fifth Head of Cerberus is the best thing I've ever done. I just try and do
each book as well as I can.
Okay, there's one more question on this. You mentioned the coda. I assume that's
The Earth of the New Sun. Is that going to be the title of that one? Yes. Okay,
you've been referring to it briefly, but I take it that that will be simply a
background rather than a narrative. Oh, no. No, it's a narrative. It takes... It
picks up Severian ten years after the end of the Citadel of the Autarch when he
is ready to leave Earth to face his trial and attempt to bring the new sun, and
it takes him through those events. Okay, I thought perhaps it might be something
like Tolkien's Silmarillion. No. No. No, I don't think it would be comparable to
that, actually. Okay, do you... Oh, yeah, I'm sorry. There was one more here. I
know every time you're interviewed you're asked this, but I feel obligated
because I can't help it. If we extracted, or if I extracted the elements of that
story, the book of the new son from it, say the time travel, the Earth being in
danger, the aliens and so forth, it could have been written almost as a space
opera or something, and I wonder why you wrote it the way you did, with the
particular style and complexity. Well, I think that, you know, if you want to
reduce any story, any work, to the lowest common denominator, you can do that. I
assume that you could take War and Peace and do it as a soap opera or a romance
novel or something, but I don't think that that's necessarily the best way to do
it. I think that a novel should be written in a way that is compatible to its
subject matter, and I was writing about a very old society with a very
complicated history. I won't say that the society is complex. I don't think it's
as complex as ours now, but its history is much more complex than ours, and I
tried to do that in a way and with a tone that I thought was appropriate to the
setting.
Okay, good. Okay, I'd like to move on for just a little bit to some things about
your background, and then if we have time to ask a little bit more about some of
your other works. Did you grow up reading science fiction? Were you a fan type?
I wasn't a fan in the sense of being a member of fandom, but when I was growing
up, fandom was very, very small. You know, I graduated from high school in 1949.
I was reading, I read the first paperback
science fiction anthology that was ever printed. That was my introduction to
science fiction. I read the old science fiction pulp magazines like Startling
Stories, Thrilling Wonder Stories, until they went out of existence. So I was an
early reader of science fiction, yes, but I never went to a science fiction
convention until the World Con in St. Louis, which I think was 1969. When did
you begin writing it? What were the circumstances that led you to that? Really,
I was looking for a way to make some money on the side, over and above my
salary. I had written for College Magazine while I was at Texas A&M, and it
occurred to me that I might be able to write some material and sell it and bring
in a little extra income. My wife and I were living in a two-room furnished
apartment at the time. We'd just been married. We neither of us had any money,
and we had to have enough money to make a down payment on furniture before we
could get out of it. Writing did not turn out to be the source of quick money
that I hoped it would at the time, but I guess I caught the bug and I kept up
with it.
I think it was in The Fifth Head of Cerberus you dedicated or something to Damon
Knight. What was his influence on your writing? Well, he was the first editor to
buy me regularly and take a real interest in what I did. He was my teacher, the
wise old man in Heinlein books. Mine was Damon Knight. Have you ever considered
taking up writing full time? Oh, yeah. I'll probably do that eventually, but I'm
getting to the age now where eventually nobody will let me do anything else.
If I remember, your degree, one of your degrees at least in college, was in
mechanical engineering. That's the only degree I have. Okay, and I think you've
worked in that field for a while and now you're an editor, is that right? Yes,
that's correct. I was a mechanical engineer for 16 years, and now I'm an editor
on a technical magazine for engineers, plant engineering.
With that kind of background, particularly the engineering background, and the,
if I remember your first novel, too, Operation Ares, was a little bit more hard
science than you usually write. I would have assumed from your background and
your beginning and so forth that you might have become a hard science writer,
and I wondered how you sort of drifted into the kind of style and technique you
use. I don't know, except, you know, anything I would say would be speculation,
perhaps because I deal with it daily. I'm anxious to get away from it for a
while, but I'm at the typewriter. That's about the only thing I can guess. You
have to remember now that when I'm writing the book of the New Sun or whatever,
I've been spending the previous day writing articles about hydraulic systems or
welding machines or something along those lines. I'm now, for plant engineering,
I'm doing a series of three articles on industrial robots, for example. And
although I certainly have nothing against robots or welding machines or
hydraulics, you don't want to live and breathe any one thing all the time, or at
least I don't think that I do.
Okay, I know you've written some mainstream works, but I wondered why you
concentrate on science fiction and fantasy rather than mainstream. Well, I don't
really think I concentrate on it. I tend to write the stories that appeal to me.
Most mainstream today, as far as I can see it, there are, well, it's either
about a couple who have been married for about 10 years and both of whom teach
at a college and who don't like each other, or it's about a woman who has just
returned to Nova Scotia after her divorce with two small children and finds an
old trunk in the attic and starts going through it. And I don't really much like
those types of stories. I tend to write the sort of thing that I think that I
would enjoy if someone else had written it, Jack Vance, for example, and I
picked it up on the newsstand.
Okay, particularly with a series like the Book of the New Sun, I've often
wondered that it seems to me an author, what you put into that series must have
been an immense amount of yourself and an immense amount of work. And I wonder
if you pay a heavy price for your writing. I mean, in terms of, I don't know, I
mean, do you have to write? Do you do it for enjoyment? Is it something that is
difficult for you to do? Yeah, it's difficult. But if you're a tennis player, I
think it's difficult to play good tennis. I'm not a tennis player, goodness
knows. But you may nevertheless enjoy playing tennis, particularly if you do it
well, or at least you're able to convince yourself that you do it well. And I
enjoy writing. It's hard. It's hard work. It's not hard work compared to digging
a big hole in hard ground on a hot day. But it's hard work in the sense that we
normally talk about hard work, which is perhaps a little childish of us. But
still, it's something that I like to do. as for paying a price, you know, what
would I be doing with that time if I were not writing? Watching reruns of MASH
on TV or something of the sort. I really don't find that sort of thing all that
rewarding. Okay, are you a disciplined writer where you work according to
schedule or do you just move as the muse comes to you? Well, I write almost
every day, usually in the morning before I go to work. So I suppose I'm
disciplined in that way. I don't wait for inspiration if that's what it is
because I think if you wait for inspiration, inspiration really never comes. you
have to sit down and start trying to do some work and then perhaps you do get a
certain inspiration.
Okay.
One more on your style, I guess, and I'll be tying up this area.
Do you identify or are there any influences on the style, the technique that you
use to write or is that just something that's naturally evolved? Oh, I'm sure
when you say it's naturally evolved, that doesn't mean there are influences. I'm
not consciously copying another writer if that's what you mean. But I've read
Jack Vance who we already mentioned. I've read Lord Dunsany. I've read H.P.
Lovecraft and what have you. and I'm sure that some of that has rubbed off on
me. Why shouldn't it? You know, if you were not imitating other people in the
way that you speak, I wouldn't be able to understand you. Do you know what I
mean? Oh, yeah.
I noticed in a lot of your stories, the Book of the New Sun, the Fifth Head of
Cerberus, some others too, that you often use a limited narrator, one who's,
well, I guess the opposite of an omniscient author. And I wondered why that
technique was so attractive to you.
I think because a limited narrator tends to see things more clearly, the
omniscient author who sees everything really can't see very many things very
well. if your narrator is a child or is a relatively simple person, he sees what
is actually going on and does not see them in terms of some philosophical
construct.
Okay, good. Are you an optimistic man about the future?
I suppose I am in an age in which nuclear war is possible. I don't really think
it's going to happen. I do think that space travel is going to happen, so I
guess I would have to say I'm an optimist. In other words, you would think that
the influence of science, if it's used correctly, could be good rather than bad?
Well, if it's used correctly, as an enormous cop-out, I think that overall the
influence of science is good and will be good for us. Obviously, it's misused.
It's always going to be misused to some extent. I don't think that it's ever
going to be so misused that we will be so badly off that we would be better off
if we didn't have it and were living in caves and trying to drive the buffalo
over the cliff by lighting brush fires.
Okay, do you, maybe this is something you don't think about, if not,
it's no big deal, but every author we talk to, we always ask him or her, do you
think there should be a distinction between science fiction and mainstream
literature or is it just simply an artificial category? I think that it is an
artificial category in the sense that publishers are trying to point their
customers toward books of the type that the customer is looking for. I think
that the term science fiction or the term fantasy or the term mystery for that
matter is essentially a marketing label which has to do with the retailing of
books as product and I don't really feel that it's something that the writer has
much business with. The writer isn't really concerned in marketing the books.
He's concerned about marketing the manuscript so to speak.
Do you have any useful distinction between science fiction and fantasy? I'm not
sure that the distinction can be useful. The question the difference between
science fiction and fantasy is very largely a matter of viewpoint. This is what
I've tried to bring together somewhat by writing science fantasy in which we
treat scientific matters the old spaceships that form the towers of the citadel
the time travel any of those things that you want to take or Baldanders'
method of prolonging his life by prolonging the juvenile phase of cellular
growth in his body. we treat those from the standpoint that is normally used in
treating creatures of pure imagination like the March Hare or mythical creatures
like the centaur. But you see you have to you have to ask yourself what is
actually possible as opposed to what is acceptable. At this point as a an
engineering journalist and a follower of science I'm certainly not a scientist a
centaur which we consider a fantasy creature is much nearer to being realized
than an interstellar spaceship and certainly much nearer to being realized than
a faster than light drive. If you talk to a physicist and say how can we make it
faster than light drive the physicist really only has the vaguest possible ideas
if he doesn't just say you can't and many physicists would say flatly that you
can't but a molecular geneticist today could tell you a good deal about how it
might be possible to make a centaur 20 years from now but by attitude we call
the centaur a fantasy and the faster than light ship science fiction. that's
excellent that's one of the best answers I've heard for that. That's very good.
Okay listen the last part of the interview it's not going to last as long as the
others I'm sure I just want to ask a few more questions about your work if
you're still okay. Is that all right? Sure. Okay the fifth head of Cerberus the
novella itself what I have is one volume the fifth head of Cerberus and the
other two that go with it that first story was there a particular impetus or
origin behind that one that you could state? Yes actually there was you're
probably not at all familiar well perhaps you are familiar with it perhaps your
listeners will be there's a Phil Farmer story called The Riders of the Purple
Wage and I read that story which is a very good story and it sort of excited me
and I thought gee that was a good story but if it had been my story I would have
done this and then I would have done that instead of what Phil did here and I
would have done this other thing instead of what Phil did here and about then I
realized that I really had a completely different story and the completely
different story that I had worked out to be the fifth head of Cerberus how did
the other two come to be written when you sat down to write the fifth head of
Cerberus did you have the plan of all three in front of you no not at all I
wrote the fifth head of Cerberus for Orbit which was a series edited for years
by Damon Knight and I took it as my Milford conference story when I went to the
Milford writers conference and it was read there by Norbert Slupian who at that
time was an editor for Scribner's he's been gone for many many years now and he
said you know if you will write two other stories of the appropriate length
we'll make a book with this and so I went back home and wrote a tale by John V.
Mark and sent that to him and said how about this and he said that's fine and he
gave me a contract and so I then wrote VRT to finish out the volume
of okay I wasn't sure but with those three stories I caught a little hint of I'm
not going to say criticism maybe but perhaps commentary on some situations on
earth perhaps the way the avos were treated the use of cloning the repressive
government and so forth and I wondered if that was meant to be a comment on
certain situations we have today of course a writer any writer cannot write
without to some degree reflecting the things that are going on in his actual
life you can't enter the theoretical ivory tower and completely separate
yourself from contemporary history or from contemporary attitudes if they happen
to be your attitudes so surely I'm sure you saw some of that the avos of course
that was very close to the fate of just about every aboriginal tribe that's been
contacted by a higher civilization the
secret police and so forth in BRT are the sort of thing that goes on in most of
the countries of the world today and pretty much has gone on wherever there's an
organized government
the second story a tale by Marsh was that made up out of whole cloth or were you
basing that on some myths or legends some aboriginal people no I just started
that with the idea of you remember I talked a moment ago about the people living
in the caves and driving the buffalo over the cliff I have been interested in
the argument or the discussion about which came first tools or people which is
one that anthropologists have it's fairly easy to imagine that at some point man
evolved it's pretty hard to imagine that that first man who evolved then figured
out how to make the first flint knife you know I doubt it he would have to be
pretty smart so did as many anthropologists feel did the pre-humans that he
evolved from develop the flint knife or did was there a period at which human
beings were human beings but had no tools whatsoever no ability to
work except with the parts of their body as say an anteater or a bear does or
whatever and so I thought that was an interesting idea and I tried to do it as a
story and I did it as of course John V. Marsh is an anthropologist in the other
stories both fifth head of Cerberus and VRT and so I pinned the speculation on
him and made it his speculation about what life on that world was like before
the first spaceships came
I don't suppose you'd tell me if the person writing the journal in prison in the
or the person in prison in that third story is an abbo or is really Marsh I
think he's an abbo myself well he is
I think pretty obviously the title character of the story yeah okay okay that's
fine okay just for a moment let me move on to a book which I like very much The
Devil in a Forest was there an idea or an impetus behind that one oh yes what I
wanted to do there was to write a book in which the protagonist did not belong
to the upper five percent of society almost invariably if somebody writes a
story about the middle ages they write about someone who is the son of some sort
of lord or lord or at the very very least squire and this person is very very
frequently the secret heir to a throne somewhere or something I wanted to write
about the sort of people that we are 95% descended from the medieval peasants
the poor people of the towns or of the countryside side and so I picked a poor
orphan boy who was an apprentice weaver in a little medieval village and took
him from there okay listen Mr. well David has to switch the tape over can you
give us about five more minutes after we do that sure okay yeah we run out of
one full tape here and we just switch it over and do it on the other side that's
what he's doing now